# FlemSibe - K8S Cluster Provider

Tired of setting up k8s cluster in vms on my PC, not wanting to use terraform and ansible right now. This is a bash script that provides vms (leveraging multipass ubuntu) and performs cli actions on them to boot up a kubernetes cluster.

## Aim of the project

This project aims at making kubernetes cluster setup easier. By providing a virtual infrastructure of different vms, deploying security rules and installing the right software for a healthy running cluster. It leverages multipass and kubeadm within other softwares.

There is a versions.json file containing objects and values corresponding to matching versions of different tools and kube, it also containes the list of instruction to perform depending on the version of kube you want to spin up. This is the way of choosing a default setup for a version. Each action to perform will correspond to a script, that will affect the vms. The way we are doing it is by writing scripts on the host, passing arguments to them, the exporting it on the vms where they will be execute returning an error or success message. The verbose generated by the command should be stored in the log folder.

So there's a recap :

1. A json file containing all versions and urls to download tools and utility
2. the same json file containing the list of instruction in order to perform and prepare the vm then install kubeernetes
3. pre-writed scripts on our host that will contain values of the global variables chosen in the version json file upon execution of the script.
4. seting ups the vm
5. passing the scripts
6. executing the scripts
7. look for a functionnal cluster
8. chears its done

## Project tree

.
├── kubeconfig
├── lib
│   ├── kube-bootstrap
│   │   ├── injections
│   │   │   ├── calico.sh
│   │   │   ├── cni.sh
│   │   │   ├── containerd.sh
│   │   │   ├── crictl-containerd.sh
│   │   │   ├── host-config.sh
│   │   │   ├── kubeadm-init.sh
│   │   │   ├── kube.sh
│   │   │   └── runc.sh
│   │   └── node-bootstrap.sh
│   ├── utils.sh
│   └── virtual-infrastructure
│       ├── injections
│       │   ├── disable-swap.sh
│       │   ├── iptables.sh
│       │   ├── ipv4-forward.sh
│       │   └── network-rules.sh
│       └── vm-provisionning.sh
├── logs
│   ├── kube-bootstrap
│   ├── run
│   └── virtual-infrastructure
├── main.sh
├── README.md
├── tests
│   ├── kube-bootstrap
│   │   ├── calico.sh
│   │   ├── cni.sh
│   │   ├── containerd.sh
│   │   ├── crictl-containerd.sh
│   │   ├── init-cp.sh
│   │   ├── iptables.sh
│   │   ├── ipv4-forward.sh
│   │   ├── kubeconfig.sh
│   │   ├── kube.sh
│   │   ├── runc.sh
│   │   └── swapp.sh
│   ├── script-config
│   │   └── validate_config.sh
│   └── virtual-infrastructure
│       ├── infra.sh
│       └── network.sh
└── versions.json

15 directories, 32 files

## First step : Providing the virtual layer

by passing args as :

--number-of-control-planes (default 1)
--number-of-workers (default 2)
--cpu (default 2 cannot be less than 2)
--memory (default 2GO cannot be less than 2GO)
--os (default noble)

We can manage the virtual infrastructure where our cluster will be spin up

## Second step : Preparing the virtual layer

### Security rules

K8s demands specific ports to be open,we could open every one of them as it is a local cluster and most likely not vital or prone to cyber attacks. But we wan't to mimic a prod environment and security rules by setting up a firewall (ufw) is a quick and easy way to get closer to a real setup.

by passing values to the following args we can tune our setup. Be aware that k8s requires specifics ports and note opening them can result in non functionnal clusters :

--open-ports-control-plane (default ["22/tcp","6443/tcp","2379:2380/tcp","10249:10260/tcp"])
--open-ports-worker (default ["22/tcp","10250/tcp","10256/tcp","30000:32767/tcp","30000:32767/udp"])

### Networking options

There are some tasks to perform to prepare each host top be a cluster node :

- swapoff
- ipv4-forwarding
- iptables management

## Kube bootstraping

Then we follow the kube adm installation process, you may precise the version of any tool you wan't by creating a custom profile in the versions.json and calling it with the flag --version.

--version (default the first in de versions.json object)

by default we will install :
- containerd
- systemd
- runc
- crictl
- the cni plugin

Then initiate the cluster with kubeadm and join the workers

## Plugins

For our cluster to perform normally, we will install a network plugin : calico for now. Also we need to setup kubeconfigs for kubectl to work on the hosts of the vms and optionnaly on the vms themselves. Finally check for helm as it will enable us to install prometheus argo and setup a CI/CD pipeline if needed.

## CUstomize the config

Rather than using --argument to pass customisation, it is recommended to use versions.json to create a custom version and provide necessary url and informations.
